# S3 Study Notes
[S3 FAQ](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/faqs/)

## S3 Structure
- Not a traditional filesystem (i.e. block-based storage)
- Files can be 0 bytes to 5TB
- Unlimited storage
- Files are stored in Buckets
- S3 is a universal namespace, bucket names must be unique globally
- sub-domain is "s3" for us-east-1, the region name for other regions (e.g. us-west-1.s3.amazonaws.com)

## S3 Functionality
- Simple web service interface (REST API)
- 200 OK response on creating objects (PUT)
- immediate consistency for creation of objects (PUT)
- Use multi-part upload for large objects (> 100MB)
- eventual consistency for overwrite PUTs (updates)/DELETEs
- Multi-factor authentication to guard DELETEs is an option
- 11 9's durability for stored objects (ever tier)
- Availability changes based on tier, glacier tiers have no availability guarantee
- Accounts are limited to 100 buckets per account by default

## S3 Object Structure
- Key
- Value
- Version ID
- Metadata
- Sub-Resources
  - Access Control Lists (ACLs)
  - Torrent

## S3 Storage Classes
| | S3 Standard | S3 Intelligent-Tiering | S3 Standard-IA | S3 One-Zone-IA | S3 Glacier | S3 Glacier Deep Archive |
| - | - | - | - | - | - | - |
| Durability | 99.999999999% (11 9's) | 99.999999999% (11 9's) | 99.999999999% (11 9's) | 99.999999999% (11 9's) | 99.999999999% (11 9's) | 99.999999999% (11 9's)
|Availability| 99.99% | 99.9% | 99.9% | 99.5% | N/A | N/A |
|Availability SLA| 99.9% | 99% | 99% | 99% | N/A | N/A |
|Availability Zones| ≥3 | ≥3 | ≥3 | 1 | ≥3 | ≥3 |
|Minimum capacity charge per object| N/A | N/A | 128KB | 128KB | 40KB | 40KB |
|Minimum Storage Duration Charge | N/A | 30 days | 30 days | 30 days | 90 days | 180 days |
|Retrieval fee| N/A | N/A | per GB retrieved | per GB retrieved | per GB retrieved | per GB retrieved|
|First Byte Latency| milliseconds| milliseconds| milliseconds| milliseconds| select minutes or hours | select hours|

### S3 Standard
- Highest tier of service
- Stored across multiple devices in multiple facilities
- Designed to sustain loss of 2 facilities concurrently

### S3 - Infrequently Accessed
- For data accessed less frequently but still requires rapid access
- Lower fee than S3
- Charged a fee per retrieval

### S3 - One Zone Infrequently Accessed
- Lower cost option than S3 IA
- Single availability zone, doesn't require data resilience
- S3 RRS (Reduced Redundancy Storage) about the same, being phased out

### S3 - Intelligent Tiering
- Optimizes costs by automatically moving data between tiers
- No performance impact or operational overhead
- Machine learning based

### S3 - Glacier
- For data archival
- Competitive with or cheaper than on-premises archival options
- Retrieval time configurable from minutes to hours

### S3 - Glacier Deep Archive
- Lowest cost option
- Retrieval time of ~12 hours

## S3 Cost Model
- Storage
- Data Requests (GET, PUT, DELETE)
- Storage Tier
- Data Transfer
- Transfer Acceleration
- Cross-Region Replication

## Sharing S3 Buckets Across Accounts
Can be done by:
- Using Bucket Policies & IAM (applies across entire bucket)
  - Programmatic Access Only
- Using Bucket ACLs & IAM (individual objects).
  - Programmatic Access Only
- Cros-account IAM Roles. Programmatic and Console access. 

## Cross-Region Replication
- Does what it says on the tin, replicates a bucket to another region
- Versioning must be enabled on source and destination buckets
- Existing files are not replicated automatically
- Can change object owner and storage tier
- Does not replicate delete markers or individual version deletes

## Transfer Acceleration
- Uses CloudFront edge locations to localize data and improve transfer performance
- Files are uploaded to edge locations and then moved back to s3 bucket
- Download times (GETs) benefit as well by use of direct circuits to S3 bucket

## S3 Security
### Encryption
- Transport level security (SSL/TLS) by default
- Optional server-side encryption (SSE)
- Can encrypt yourself prior to storage
#### Types of Encryption
1. SSE-S3 - Fully integrated solution, Amazon handles key management and key protection.
2. SSE-C - Amazon performs encryption/decryption, you manage the keys you send to Amazon to do this. Doesn't require client-side implementation of encryption
3. AWS-KMS - Uses AWS Key Management Service to manage your encryption keys. Separate permissions for master key, audit trails and failed access attempts. PCI-DSS, HIPAA/HITECH, and FedRAMP compliance
4. Client-side Encryption - Everything's up to you: encryption/decryption, key management, etc.
### Access Control
- Identity and Access Management (IAM)
- Bucket Policies
- Access Control Lists
- Query String Authentication
### Auditing
- S3 buckets can be configured to generate access logs
- AWS CloudTrail Data Events have even more info, specifically IAM/user identity
### Amazon Macie
Machine learning discovery, classification and DLP service provided by Amazon. Identifies sensitive information such as personally identifiable information and monitors/alerts for suspicious data access activity. Often used for PCI-DSS compliance and preventing identity theft.

Customers can revoke Macie access to data.

### Access Analyzer
Monitors access policies and ensures you only provide the intended access to S3 resources.
## S3 Versioning
- Stores all versions of an object, even if you delete it.
- Great for backup
- Once enabled on a bucket, it cannot be disabled (only suspended)
- Integrates with Lifecycle rules
- Versioning's Multi-factor Authentication delete helps prevent accidental deletion.
## S3 Lifecycle Policies
- Complimentary to versioning
- Simpler than intelligent tiering but can do roughly the same thing
- Commonly used to move objects between storage tiers and to set up disposition/expiration policies

## S3 Access Points
Allows customized, per-application level path into a bucket with unique hostname and access policy to support use of shared data sets.

Simplifies managing of permissions and access to shared data sets, alternative is having all the rules and ACLs on the bucket itself.

No additional charge.

## Query in Place
Allows customers to run sophisticated queries against data stored in S3 without the need to move the data to a separate analytics platform. Multiple options including `S3 Select`, `Amazon Athena`, and `Amazon Redshift Spectrum` each with different features/capabilities.

- S3 Select - simple, SQL-like query language
- Amazon Athena - serverless, standard SQL queries, can use `Amazon QuickSight` for visualizations and can do complex analysis. Used for:
  - Querying log files (e.g. ELB logs, S3 access logs, etc.)
  - Generate business reports on data stored in S3
  - Analyze AWS cost and usage reports
  - Run queries on click-stream data
- Amazon Redshift Spectrum - run queries against *very* large sets of unstructured data with no loading or ETL required

## Event Notification
Does what it says on the tin, sends notifications via `Amazon SNS`, `Amazon SQS`, or directly to `Amazon Lambda`

## Object Tags
Key-value pairs that can be applied to S3 objects which can be created, updated or deleted any time. Can be used for IAM policies, lifecycle policies and custom storage metrics.

## Provisioned Capacity Units (PCUs) 
Can be purchased & guarantee retrieval capacity for expedited retrieval is available when you need it. Each unit of capacity ensures that at least 3 expedited retrievals can be performed every 5 minutes and provides up to 150MB/s of retrieval throughput. Retrieval capacity can be provisioned if you have specific Expedited retrieval rate requirements that need to be met. Without provisioned capacity, Expedited retrieval requests will be accepted if capacity is available at the time the request is made. You can purchase provisioned capacity using the console, SDK, or the CLI. Each unit of provisioned capacity costs $100 per month from the date of purchase.
